---
layout: post
title:  "Using APIs: Access NASA data (IN PROGRESS)"
date:   2022-10-16
author: Katelyn Nelson
description: Learn how to use an API in Python to access NASA's global landslide data
image: /assets/images/A325630C-D68B-42C9-8EB8-FBB0C428BEC2.jpg
---

Every data analysis begins with 'data' (see what I did there? 😉). So where can you get data without putting the effort into collecting your own? An API (application programming interface) is a powerful tool that acts as a bridge between your device and a database so that you can access existing data. To use an API you need a unique 'key' that acts as a personal password to authenticate your access to the data. There are a lot of free APIs online that you can request keys for, but sometimes they require a paid subscription.

If you want to learn more about using APIs in Python, I recommend starting [here](https://wesmckinney.com/book/accessing-data.html#io_web_apis). I will be using NASA's Open Data Portal, which has tons of pictures, data, and other resources available for free as long as you agree to their Terms and Conditions, as well as cite the data when you use it.

**Note:** All of the code that I used to complete this tutorial can be found in my github repository [repo](https://github.com/katelynnelson38/nasa_api).

# Set up

Before we can start, you will need to [create an account](https://data.nasa.gov/login) to NASA's Open Data Portal and [request an API key](https://api.nasa.gov/index.html#signUp). I recommend copying your API key and pasting it into text file to use for later use. In this post I will be using NASA's [Global Landslide Catalog Export](https://data.nasa.gov/Earth-Science/Global-Landslide-Catalog-Export/dd9e-wu2v) data.

In a python file...

To connect to the NASA API we will use the beautiful soup and requests packages, so make sure to import those.

```
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
import requests
```

# Get the Data

For privacy and legal purposes, I will not share my API key, but if you put yours in a text file it should work the same. I named my file `nasa_apikey.txt` so in the code below substitute your file name.

```
with open('nasa_apikey.txt', 'r') as file:
    nasa_key = file.read()
```

```
nasa_url = 'https://data.nasa.gov/resource/dd9e-wu2v.json'
r = requests.get(nasa_url, headers=headers, data = payload)
landslide = r.json()
landslide_df = pd.DataFrame(landslide)
landslide_df.head(3)
```

# Clean the Data

#

# Conclusion

Now you 

Stay tuned 👀 for my next post where I will do an EDA (exploratory data analysis) with the landslide dataframe we just created!

### Data Sources

Kirschbaum, D. B., Adler, R., Hong, Y., Hill, S., & Lerner-Lam, A. (2010). A global landslide catalog for hazard applications: method, results, and limitations. Natural Hazards, 52(3), 561–575. doi:10.1007/s11069-009-9401-4.

Kirschbaum, D.B., T. Stanley, Y. Zhou (In press, 2015). Spatial and Temporal Analysis of a Global Landslide Catalog. Geomorphology. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2015.03.016.
